Making L1 images
================

An L1 (level 1) image is a "raw" image received from the detectors.  The actual measurements made on the spacecraft consist of a number of non-destructive reads of the pixels of the H4RG detectors.  These reads have independent read noise but because the pixels count the total number of electrons having entered each pixel, the Poisson noise in different reads of the same pixel is correlated.

Because the telescope has limited bandwidth, every read is not transferred to ground stations.  Instead, reads are averaged into "resultants" according to a specification called a MultiAccum table, and these resultants are transferred, archived, and analyzed.  These resultants make up an L1 image, which romanisim simulates.

L1 images are created starting with an idealized ``counts`` image described :doc:`here </romanisim/image>`, which contains the number of electrons each pixel of the detector would receive in the absence of any instrumental systematics.  To transform this into an L1 image, these electrons must be apportioned into reads and averaged into resultants, and instrumental effects must be added.

This process proceeds by simulating each read, drawing the appropriate number of electrons from the total number of electrons for each read following a binomial distribution.  These electrons are added to a running sum that is then averaged into a resultant according to the MultiAccum table specification.  This process requires drawing random numbers from the binomial distribution for every read of every pixel, and so can take on the order of a minute, but it allows detailed simulation of the statistics of the noise in each resultant together with their correlations.  It also makes it straightforward to add various instrumental effects into the simulation accurately, since these usually apply to individual reads rather than to resultants (e.g., cosmic rays affect individual reads, and their affect on a resultant depends on the read in the resultant to which they apply).

After apportioning counts to resultants, systematic effects are added to the resultants.  Presently only read noise is added.  The read noise is averaged down like :math:`1/\sqrt{N}`, where :math:`N` is the number of reads contributing to the resultant.

Nonlinearity
------------

Non-linearity is considered when L1 images are constructed and a non-linearity model is provided (e.g., from CRDS).  There are two sources of non-linearity: classical non-linearity (CNL) due to the change in pixel capacitance with accumulated charge, and integral non-linearity (INL) in the analog-to-digital converter.

Classical non-linearity is modeled as a high order polynomial, and the coefficients of this polynomial and its inverse are stored in CRDS (linearity, inverselinearity reference files for each detector).  When assigning counts to each read, these are transformed through the inverselinearity polynomial for each pixel and then added to the resultant buffer to account for this effect.  The linearity polynomial then corrects for this effect as part of calibrating an L1 file and eventually producing an L2 file.

Integral non-linearity is corrected via a per-channel lookup table (integralnonlinearity reference file).  Each of the 32 readout channels has its own correction table mapping observed DN values to a correction offset.  When simulating L1 images, the INL correction is subtracted from each read; when calibrating, it is added back.  See `Brandt & Perera (2025) <https://www.stsci.edu/files/live/sites/www/files/home/roman/documentation/technical-documentation/_documents/Roman-STScI–000866.pdf>`_ for details on INL for Roman.

The linearity polynomials are occasionally poorly determined or cannot be computed.  When marked as problematic in the reference file, we use trivial polynomials (i.e., the identity), and mark the affected pixels with a DQ bit indicating a problematic linearity correction.


Interpixel Capacitance
----------------------

Interpixel capacitance (IPC) is added following non-linearity and before read-out.  Read noise remains independent among different pixels but the Poisson noise is correlated between pixels by the IPC.  We simply convolve the resultants by a 3x3 kernel after apportioning counts to resultants and applying non-linearity but before adding read noise.

This is slightly different than including IPC in the PSF kernel because including IPC in the PSF kernel leaves the Poisson noise uncorrelated between pixels.

Persistence
-----------
Persistence is implemented in the simulator following Sanchez+2023.  This follows
the Fermi description of persistence implemented in GalSim, where the flux in electrons per second recorded in a pixel is parameterized in terms of the total number of counts recorded in an earlier frame.

.. math:: P(t) = A \frac{1}{1+\exp\left(\frac{-(x-x_0)}{\delta x}\right)} \left(\frac{x}{x_0}\right)^\alpha \left(\frac{t}{1000 \mathrm{s}}\right)^\gamma \, .

Here :math:`P(x, t)` is the rate in electrons per second that the pixel records :math:`t` seconds following receiving a total number of electrons :math:`x`.  The parameters :math:`A`, :math:`x_0`, :math:`\delta x`, :math:`\alpha`, :math:`\gamma` may vary from pixel to pixel, though are presently fixed to global constants.  This equation for the rate only applies to pixels that were illuminated more than to fill more than their half-well.  We follow GalSim and linearly increase the persistence from 0 to the half-well value for illuminations between 0 and half-well.

This persistence rate is sampled with a Poisson distribution and added to each pixel read-by-read and incorporated into the resultants in the L1 images.

Persistence-affected pixels are expected to be rare, and are tracked sparsely via a list of the indices of affected pixels, the amount of the illumination, and the times of their illumination.  Pixels are dropped from persistence tracking when their persistence rate is less than one electron per 100 seconds.  If the same pixel receives large fluxes multiple times in past exposures, these are treated as independent events and the resulting persistence flux is handled by summing the persistence rates for each past event.

Cosmic rays
-----------
Cosmic rays are added to the simulation read-by-read.  The cosmic ray parameters follow Wu et al. (2023).  The locations of cosmic rays are chosen at random to sample the focal plane uniformly.  Lengths are chosen according to a power law distribution :math:`p(l) \propto l^{-4.33}`, with lengths between 10 and 10,000 microns.  Charge deposition rates per micron are selected from a Moyal distribution located at 120 electrons per micron with a width of 50 electrons per micron.  An idealized charge is computed for each pixel in a read according to the product of the deposition rate per micron and the length of the cosmic ray's path within that pixel.  This idealized charge is Poisson sampled and added to the relevant pixels in a read.

Dark Decay
----------

WFI detectors exhibit a decaying signal in the first few resultants of an exposure, with a typical amplitude of ~0.4 DN and a time constant of ~23 s.  The effect is modeled as a simple exponential decay :math:`A \exp(-t / \tau)` where the amplitude :math:`A` and time constant :math:`\tau` vary from detector to detector but affect all pixels on a given detector in the same way.

Because pixels in different readout channels are read at slightly different times within a frame, the dark decay signal varies across the detector.  romanisim models this by computing per-pixel read times for each of the 32 readout channels, accounting for the alternating readout direction and SCA-dependent row/column flip.

The dark decay is a purely electronic effect occurring during readout that is not subject to nonlinearity.  It is therefore added to the resultants after converting from electrons to DN.  Likewise, when calibrating L1 to L2, it is subtracted before the linearity correction is applied.

See `Betti et al. (2025), The Statistical Properties of Dark Ramps for the Roman-WFI Detectors <https://www.stsci.edu/files/live/sites/www/files/home/roman/documentation/technical-documentation/_documents/Roman-STScI-000814.pdf>`_ for more information.

Gain
----
L1 files are in units of DN.  We convert from photons to DN using gains from CRDS or a default values of 2 electron per DN, treating electrons and photons as equivalent.  This neglects the possibility that the quantum yield may be different from 1 at certain wavelengths, in particular in the blue, where `Givans+2022 <https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1538-3873/ac46ba>`_ find a quantum field of up to 1.05.

.. _velocity-aberration:

Velocity Aberration
-------------------

Velocity (or stellar) aberration is the amount of change in an object's apparent
location on the sky due to motion of the observer in relation to the object. For
observers orbiting the Sun at approximately 1 AU, the absolute correction can be
up to 26 arcsec. For Roman, this absolute difference will be handled by
spacecraft operations. However, this is true for only the target; the aberration
changes across the FOV, varying in both position and time. This differential
aberration is implemented as a scale factor from the reference point of each
detector. For Roman, this scale is approximately one-fifth of an arcsec at the
corners.

For simulation, since the Roman orbit is undefined and would be dominated by the
Earth's motion anyways, Earth barycentric velocity is used.

.. automodapi:: romanisim.l1
.. automodapi:: romanisim.nonlinearity
.. automodapi:: romanisim.persistence
.. automodapi:: romanisim.cr
.. automodapi:: romanisim.velocity_aberration
