L3 images
=========

We also simulate L3 images, also known as coadded images or mosaics; these terms are used equivalently here.  In contrast to L1 and L2 images, L3 images do not do a full simulation of the individual reads entering each resultant and the following ramp fitting.  Accordingly, they also do not include most systematic effects---for example, cosmic rays and non-linearity are not simulated.  Instead, the L3 simulations conceptually are more closely related to the initial idealized :doc:`count images </romanisim/image>` than they are to L1 or L2 images.  They differ from these idealized images in that we attempt to change the PSF in order to account for non-native pixel scales that are possible in coadded images.

The simulation of L3 images is simplified relative to true L3 images.  First, as above, we do not do the full L2 simulations.  Second, we do not have a notion of a series of images that are being coadded---we are instead just saying that one could produce a mosaic that has a particular pixel scale, effective read noise, and exposure time.  We do not attempt to simulate the drizzle process used for typical L3 images in Roman, and accordingly do not include any drizzle-induced covariances among the pixels.  Similarly, because we don't really have a notion of a series of input L2 images, the L3 PSF is not a combination of the PSF of the input images, but is instead taken as the PSF evaluated at the center of the WFI02 detector, and then additionally convolved depending on the output pixel grid scale.

The L3 PSF aims to include the convolution with the native scale that Roman necessarily includes, but to also support oversampled images where the L3 pixel scale can be significantly finer than the native pixel scale.  In these cases we include an additional square convolution to "make up the difference" between the L3 pixel scale and the L2 pixel scale; see the :meth:`romanisim.l3.l3_psf` method for more details.

The ``romanisim-make-l3`` command-line interface can be used to make L3 files.  Invocations look like::

    romanisim-make-l3 --bandpass F158 --radec 270 66 --npix 2000 --pixscalefrac 0.9 --exptime 1000 l3.asdf gaia-270-66-2027-06-01.ecsv

which would make an F158 image with 2000x2000 pixels, slightly oversampled, corresponding to 1000 seconds, using the given catalog and output filename.

There are a number of possible input arguments::

    romanisim-make-l3 -h
    usage: romanisim-make-image [-h] [--bandpass BANDPASS] [--boresight] [--catalog CATALOG] [--config CONFIG] [--date DATE] [--level LEVEL] [--ma_table_number MA_TABLE_NUMBER]
                                [--nobj NOBJ] [--previous PREVIOUS] [--radec RADEC RADEC] [--rng_seed RNG_SEED] [--roll ROLL] [--sca SCA] [--usecrds] [--psftype {None,epsf,galsim,stpsf}]
                                [--webbpsf] [--stpsf] [--truncate TRUNCATE] [--pretend-spectral PRETEND_SPECTRAL] [--drop-extra-dq] [--scale-factor SCALE_FACTOR]
                                [--extra-counts EXTRA_COUNTS [EXTRA_COUNTS ...]]
                                filename

    Make a demo image.

    positional arguments:
      filename              output image (asdf). {} and {bandpass} strings will be automatically populated with detector and bandpass information.

    options:
      -h, --help            show this help message and exit
      --bandpass BANDPASS   bandpass to simulate (default: F087)
      --boresight           radec specifies location of boresight, not center of WFI. (default: False)
      --catalog CATALOG     input catalog (ecsv) (default: None)
      --config CONFIG       input parameter override file (yaml) (default: None)
      --date DATE           UTC Date and Time of observation to simulate in ISOT format. (default: 2026-01-01T00:00:00.000)
      --level LEVEL         1 or 2, for L1 or L2 output (default: 2)
      --ma_table_number MA_TABLE_NUMBER
      --nobj NOBJ
      --previous PREVIOUS   previous simulated file in chronological order used for persistence modeling. (default: None)
      --radec RADEC RADEC   ra and dec (deg) (default: None)
      --rng_seed RNG_SEED
      --roll ROLL           Position angle (North towards YIdl) measured at the V2Ref/V3Ref of the aperture used. (default: 0)
      --sca SCA             SCA to simulate. Use -1 to generate images for all SCAs; include {} in filename for this mode to indicate where the detector number should be filled, e.g.
                            l1_{}.asdf (default: 7)
      --usecrds             Use CRDS references. (default: False)
      --psftype {None,epsf,galsim,stpsf}
                            Type of PSF generator to use. If None and --usecrds, then "epsf" will be used otherwise "galsim" is used. (default: None)
      --webbpsf             Use stpsf for PSF (deprecated, use `--psftype stpsf`) (default: False)
      --stpsf               Use stpsf for PSF (deprecated, use `--psftype stpsf`) (default: False)
      --truncate TRUNCATE   If set, truncate the MA table at given number of resultants. (default: None)
      --pretend-spectral PRETEND_SPECTRAL
                            Pretend the image is spectral. exposure.type and instrument.element are updated to be grism / prism. (default: None)
      --drop-extra-dq       Do not store the optional simulated dq array. (default: False)
      --scale-factor SCALE_FACTOR
                            Velocity aberration-induced scale factor. If negative, use given time to calculated based on orbit ephemeris. (default: -1.0)
      --extra-counts EXTRA_COUNTS [EXTRA_COUNTS ...]
                            An optional FITS file to read to get an array of counts to add into the simulated image.Useful for wrapping idealized images.If 2 arguments are sent in, then
                            the second argument is assumed to be the HDU to use (default=0) (default: None)

      EXAMPLE: romanisim-make-image output_image.asdf

The arguments control things like the filter used, the date of observation (used
to estimate the sky background), the right ascension and declination of the
center of the mosaic, the number of pixels in the mosaic, and the degree of
oversampling of the output mosaic. Parameters also control the effective depth
of the mosaic, through the exposure time, effective read noise, and number of
exposures.

L3 source injection
-------------------

We support injecting sources into L3 files. L3 source injection is very similar
to L3 image creation, except we do not need to invent effective read noises or
exposure times or WCSes. Instead we only change the Poisson noise, since we are
only adding additional new sources.

Conceptually we just add more sources to the image in the same way as in L3
image creation. The primary challenge is picking the correct exposure time so
that the Poisson noise in the simulation is correct; we (optionally) simulate
individual photons and so the conversion between calibrated units and electrons
is still relevant in the L3 files. We do this by using the relationship between
the calibrated flux and corresponding Poisson variance to figure out the
effective calibrated-flux-to-electron relationship, and then simulate the
appropriate number of electrons and convert back.

The function :meth:`romanisim.l3.inject_sources_into_l3` is the intended entry
point for L3 source injection; see its documentation for more details about how
to add sources to an L3 image.

.. automodapi:: romanisim.l3
